doc/md: add doctrine provider guide (#2606)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/orms/doctrine.mdx

---
id: doctrine
title: Automatic migration planning for Doctrine
slug: /guides/orms/doctrine
---

import InstallationInstructions from '../../components/_installation_instructions.mdx'
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## TL;DR
* [Doctrine](https://www.doctrine-project.org/) is an ORM library that's widely used in the PHP community.
* [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is an open-source tool for inspecting, planning, linting and
  executing schema changes to your database.
* Developers using Doctrine can use Atlas to automatically plan schema migrations
  for them, based on the desired state of their schema instead of crafting them by hand.

## Automatic migration planning for Doctrine

> Doctrine is a popular ORM widely used in the PHP community, used by projects like Symfony. 

Reviewer: Link to Symfony

> Doctrine allows users to manage their database schemas using its [orm:schema-tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/reference/tools.html#schematool) Console command,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doctrine allows users to manage their database schemas using its [orm:schema-tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/reference/tools.html#schematool) Console Command,
```

which is usually sufficient during development and in many simple cases.

However, at some point, teams need more control and decide to employ [versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations) methodology.
Doctrine has a [Migration tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-migrations/en/3.7/index.html) that can be used to manage versioned migrations.
Doctrine can also [generate a migration](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-migrations/en/3.7/reference/generating-migrations.html)
for you by comparing the current state of your database schema to the state defined by using the ORM.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> A downside of this approach is that in order for it to work, a pre-existing database with the current version of the schema must be connected to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A downside of this approach is that in order for it to work, you must be connected to a pre-existing database with the current version of the schema.
```

In many production environments, databases should generally not be reachable from developer workstations,
which means this comparison is normally done against a local copy of the database which may have
undergone some changes that aren't reflected in the existing migrations.

> More of the limitations of Doctrine migration tool include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More of the limitations of the Doctrine migration tool include:
```

* **Ensuring Migration Safety.** Migrations are a risky business. If you're not careful, you can easily cause data loss or 

>   a production outage. Doctrine migration tool does not provide a native way to ensure that a migration is safe to apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a production outage. The Doctrine migration tool does not provide a native way to ensure that a migration is safe to apply.
```

> * **Modern Deployments.**  Doctrine does not provide native integration with modern deployment practices such as [GitOps](/blog/2023/12/06/gitops-for-databases-part-1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Modern Deployments.**  Doctrine does not provide native integrations with modern deployment practices such as [GitOps](/blog/2023/12/06/gitops-for-databases-part-1)
```

  or [Infrastructure-as-Code](/blog/2023/07/19/bridging-the-gap-between-iac-and-schema-management).

Using Atlas, you can enjoy automatic migration planning, automatic code review and integrations with your favorite CI/CD tools.

> Atlas works in similar way to Doctrine migration tool, by calculating the diff between the _current_ state of the database,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas works in similar way to the Doctrine migration tool, by calculating the diff between the _current_ state of the database,
```

## Prerequisites

* A local [Doctrine](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/index.html) project.

If you don't have a Doctrine project, you can create one by following the [Getting Started](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/tutorials/getting-started.html) guide.

## Using the Atlas Doctrine Provider

In this guide, we will use the [Doctrine Atlas Provider](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine)
to automatically plan schema migrations for a Doctrine project.

### Installation

<InstallationInstructions />

Install the provider by running:
<Tabs>
<TabItem value="v2" label="Dcotrine 2" default>

```bash
composer require ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine:v2
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="v3" label="Doctrine 3">

```bash
composer require ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine:v3
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Doctrine Command vs Script mode

The Atlas Doctrine Provider can be used in two modes:

* **Doctrine Command** - If all of your Doctrine entities exist under single directory,
you can add the atlas-provider command to the [Doctrine Console](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.0/reference/tools.html) file.

> * **Script** - In other cases, you can use the provider as a php script to load your Doctrine schema into Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Script** - In other cases, you can use the provider as a PHP script to load your Doctrine schema into Atlas.
```

```

Running this command will generate files similar to this in the `migrations` directory:

```
migrations
|-- 20240310094824.sql
`-- atlas.sum

0 directories, 2 files
```

Examining the contents of the `20240310094824.sql`:

```sql
-- Create "users" table
CREATE TABLE `users` (
  `id` int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`)
) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
-- Create "bugs" table
CREATE TABLE `bugs` (
  `id` int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `description` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  `created` datetime NOT NULL,
  `status` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  `engineer_id` int NULL,
  `reporter_id` int NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`),
  INDEX `IDX_1E197C9E1CFE6F5` (`reporter_id`),
  INDEX `IDX_1E197C9F8D8CDF1` (`engineer_id`),
  CONSTRAINT `FK_1E197C9E1CFE6F5` FOREIGN KEY (`reporter_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION,
  CONSTRAINT `FK_1E197C9F8D8CDF1` FOREIGN KEY (`engineer_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION
) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;

```

Amazing! Atlas automatically generated a migration file that will create the `users` and `bugs` tables in our database.

> Next, alter the `User` entity to include `$name` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, alter the `User` entity to include a `$name` property.
```

---
id: doctrine
title: Automatic migration planning for Doctrine
slug: /guides/orms/doctrine
---

import InstallationInstructions from '../../components/_installation_instructions.mdx'
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## TL;DR
* [Doctrine](https://www.doctrine-project.org/) is an ORM library that's widely used in the PHP community.
* [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is an open-source tool for inspecting, planning, linting and
  executing schema changes to your database.
* Developers using Doctrine can use Atlas to automatically plan schema migrations
  for them, based on the desired state of their schema instead of crafting them by hand.

## Automatic migration planning for Doctrine
Doctrine is a popular ORM widely used in the PHP community, used by projects like [Symfony](https://symfony.com/).
Doctrine allows users to manage their database schemas using its [orm:schema-tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/reference/tools.html#schematool) Console Command,
which is usually sufficient during development and in many simple cases.

> However, at some point, teams need more control and decide to employ [versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations) methodology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, at some point, teams need more control and decide to employ a [versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations) methodology.
```

> Doctrine has a [Migration tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-migrations/en/3.7/index.html) that can be used to manage versioned migrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doctrine has a [migration tool](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-migrations/en/3.7/index.html) that can be used to manage versioned migrations.
```

A downside of this approach is that in order for it to work, you must be connected to a pre-existing database with the current version of the schema.
In many production environments, databases should generally not be reachable from developer workstations,
which means this comparison is normally done against a local copy of the database which may have
undergone some changes that aren't reflected in the existing migrations.

More of the limitations of the Doctrine migration tool include:

* **Ensuring Migration Safety.** Migrations are a risky business. If you're not careful, you can easily cause data loss or 
  a production outage. The Doctrine migration tool does not provide a native way to ensure that a migration is safe to apply.
* **Modern Deployments.**  Doctrine does not provide native integrations with modern deployment practices such as [GitOps](/blog/2023/12/06/gitops-for-databases-part-1)
  or [Infrastructure-as-Code](/blog/2023/07/19/bridging-the-gap-between-iac-and-schema-management).

Using Atlas, you can enjoy automatic migration planning, automatic code review and integrations with your favorite CI/CD tools.

> Atlas works in similar way to the Doctrine migration tool, by calculating the diff between the _current_ state of the database,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas works in a similar way to the Doctrine migration tool, by calculating the diff between the _current_ state of the database,
```

Reviewer: missing the end of this sentence..

In the context of [versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations),
the current state can be thought of as the database schema that would have
been created by applying all previous migration scripts.

The desired schema of your application can be provided to Atlas via an [External Schema Datasource](/atlas-schema/projects#data-source-external_schema),
which is any program that can output a SQL schema definition to stdout.

To use Atlas with Doctrine, users can utilize the [Doctrine Atlas Provider](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine),

> which is a small program that can be used to load the schema of a Doctrine project into Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is a small program that loads the schema of a Doctrine project into Atlas.
```

> In this guide, we will show how Atlas can be used to automatically plan schema migrations for Doctrine users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will show how to use Atlas to automatically plan schema migrations for Doctrine users.
```

## Prerequisites

* A local [Doctrine](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.1/index.html) project.

If you don't have a Doctrine project, you can use [symfony/demo](https://github.com/symfony/demo) as a starting point:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:symfony/demo.git
```

## Using the Atlas Doctrine Provider

In this guide, we will use the [Doctrine Atlas Provider](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine)
to automatically plan schema migrations for a Doctrine project.

### Installation

<InstallationInstructions />

Install the provider, depending on the [`doctrine/dbal`](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/dbal.html)
version you are using in the `composer.json` file:
<Tabs>
<TabItem value="v3" label="Dcotrine DBAL v3" default>

```bash
composer require ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine:^3
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="v4" label="Doctrine DBAL v4">

```bash
composer require ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine:^4
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Doctrine Command vs Script mode

The Atlas Doctrine Provider can be used in two modes:

> * **Doctrine Command** - If all of your Doctrine entities exist under single directory,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Doctrine Command** - If all of your Doctrine entities exist under a single directory,
```

> you can add the atlas-provider command to the [Doctrine Console](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.0/reference/tools.html) file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can add the `atlas-provider` command to the [Doctrine Console](https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/3.0/reference/tools.html) file.
```

* **Script** - In other cases, or if you use a [Symfony](https://symfony.com/) project,
you can use the provider as a PHP script to load your Doctrine schema into Atlas.

### Using the Doctrine Command

> Add the atlas-provider command to the Doctrine Console file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `atlas-provider`command to the Doctrine Console file:
```

```diff
#!/usr/bin/env php
<?php

use Doctrine\ORM\Tools\Console\ConsoleRunner;
use Doctrine\ORM\Tools\Console\EntityManagerProvider\SingleManagerProvider;

require 'bootstrap.php';
+ require "vendor/ariga/atlas-provider-doctrine/src/Command.php";

ConsoleRunner::run(
    new SingleManagerProvider($entityManager),
+   [new AtlasCommand()]
);
```

Next, in your project directory, create a new file named `atlas.hcl` with the following contents:

```hcl
data "external_schema" "doctrine" {
  program = [
    "php",
    "bin/doctrine", // path to your Doctrine Console file
    "atlas:dump-sql",
    "--path", "./path/to/entities",
    "--dialect", "mysql" // mariadb | postgres | sqlite | sqlserver
  ]
}

env "doctrine" {
  src = data.external_schema.doctrine.url
  dev = "docker://mysql/8/dev"
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
  format {
    migrate {
      diff = "{{ sql . \"  \" }}"
    }
  }
}
```

> ### As PHP Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### As a PHP Script
```

#[ORM\Entity]
#[ORM\Table(name: 'users')]
class User
{
    #[ORM\Id]
    #[ORM\GeneratedValue]
    #[ORM\Column(type: 'integer')]
    private int|null $id = null;

    #[ORM\Column(type: 'string')]
    private string $name;

    #[ORM\OneToMany(targetEntity: Bug::class, mappedBy: 'reporter')]
    private Collection $reportedBugs;

    #[ORM\OneToMany(targetEntity: Bug::class, mappedBy: 'engineer')]
    private $assignedBugs;
}

```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="bug" label="Bug.php">

```php
<?php

namespace entities;

use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;
use User;

#[ORM\Entity]
#[ORM\Table(name: 'bugs')]
class Bug
{
    #[ORM\Id]
    #[ORM\Column(type: 'integer')]
    #[ORM\GeneratedValue]
    private int|null $id = null;

    #[ORM\Column(type: 'string')]
    private string $description;

    #[ORM\Column(type: 'datetime')]
    private DateTime $created;

    #[ORM\Column(type: 'string')]
    private string $status;

    #[ORM\ManyToOne(targetEntity: User::class, inversedBy: 'assignedBugs')]
    private User|null $engineer = null;

    #[ORM\ManyToOne(targetEntity: User::class, inversedBy: 'reportedBugs')]
    private User|null $reporter;
}

```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> We can generate a migration file by running this command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can generate a migration file by running the following command:
```

```bash
atlas migrate diff --env doctrine
```

> Running this command will generate files similar to this in the `migrations` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running this command will generate files in the `migrations` directory, similarly to:
```

  `id` int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`)
) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
-- Create "bugs" table
CREATE TABLE `bugs` (
  `id` int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `description` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  `created` datetime NOT NULL,
  `status` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  `engineer_id` int NULL,
  `reporter_id` int NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`),
  INDEX `IDX_1E197C9E1CFE6F5` (`reporter_id`),
  INDEX `IDX_1E197C9F8D8CDF1` (`engineer_id`),
  CONSTRAINT `FK_1E197C9E1CFE6F5` FOREIGN KEY (`reporter_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION,
  CONSTRAINT `FK_1E197C9F8D8CDF1` FOREIGN KEY (`engineer_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION
) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;

```

Amazing! Atlas automatically generated a migration file that will create the `users` and `bugs` tables in our database.

Next, alter the `User` entity to include a `$name` property.

```diff
    #[ORM\Id]
    #[ORM\GeneratedValue]
    #[ORM\Column(type: 'integer')]
    private int|null $id = null;

+   #[ORM\Column(type: 'string')]
+   private string $name;
```

Re-run this command:

```bash
atlas migrate diff --env doctrine
```

> Observe a new migration file is generated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observe that a new migration file is generated:
```

```sql
-- Modify "users" table
ALTER TABLE `users` ADD COLUMN `name` varchar(255) NOT NULL;
```

## Conclusion

In this guide we demonstrated how projects using Dcotrine can use Atlas to automatically
plan schema migrations based only on their data model. To learn more about executing

> migrations against your production database, read the documentation for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrations against your production database, read the documentation about the
```
